# Wayfire 0.5.0

I am pleased to announce the release of Wayfire 0.5.0. There has been 247 commits since the last release. Here are some highlights:

### Support for always-on-top views
The new [`wm-actions`](https://github.com/WayfireWM/wayfire/wiki/Configuration#wm-actions) plugin now supports a key and/or a button binding to make a view stay on top of all others on its output. Most of the work was needed for the underlying mechanism, sublayers, which is much more powerful - it is a way to make views stick together, and dock them below, in the middle or above a particular layer.

### Improvements in workspace switching plugins
The workspace switching plugin, `vswitch`, now has a better animation which makes it more obvious that the current workspace changes.
Its counterpart for touchpad gestures `vswipe` now has a free movement mode, which lets you swipe though multiple workspaces at once.

### Latency improvements
There is now support for the `presentation-time` protocol. It was part of an effort to improve latency in Wayfire with the strategy from [weston](https://ppaalanen.blogspot.com/2015/02/weston-repaint-scheduling.html). It is controlled via the `core/max_render_time` option, which indicates the maximum time wayfire will need to repaint an output.

### `primary-selection` protocol

This protocol is needed for middle-click-paste to work. The implementation of the protocol is mostly done by `wlroots`, so Wayfire needs just a couple of lines for it to work. However, enabling it initially caused crashes in all GTK applications. After hours of debuggingg, it turned out to be a bug in GTK3, and I had to change the ordering of globals (wayland protocol objects) so that the `primary-selection` global is one of the first advertised. Phew!

### `output-power-management` protocol

This makes it possible for users to put outputs in power save mode from the command line, see [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/WayfireWM/wayfire/issues/455).

### Bug fixes

There has been the usual big amount of bug fixes. Be it Xwayland, input or plugins - many areas have seen small improvements.

## Breaking changes

There has been some breaking changes in this release, so you may need a minute or two to upgrade your config file if you are using these options.

### `matcher` has been dropped

The matcher plugin was useful for specifying a class of views based on their properties. For example, you can use the fire animation for your dmenu and chrome browser, but use the zoom animation for other windows.

This plugin has now been moved into core. Erik Van Hamme has been working on our new `wf-utils` library, which provides this functionality. The syntax has changed a bit though, so consult the [wiki](https://github.com/WayfireWM/wayfire/wiki/Configuration#criteria) for migration.

### Some input options have been renamed

`xkb_option`, `xkb_rule` and `disable_while_typing` are now `xkb_options`, `xkb_rules` and `disable_touchpad_while_typing`. The change was made to match the names used in the `xkbcommon` library and to make the options more descriptive.

### `simple-tile/key_toggle_fullscreen`

This option has been removed in favor of the [equivalent option](https://github.com/WayfireWM/wayfire/wiki/Configuration#wm-actionstoggle_fullscreen) in `wm-actions`.

## Internal work

Even if the user-facing part of Wayfire has changed a lot, the change has been even greater on the inside. I will list only the big breaking changes here:

### Coordinate system simplification

Wayfire has used up to 4 different coordinate systems for rendering operations before. Now, there are only 2 - the output-local coordinate system, and the framebuffer-local one. This has necessitated some breaking changes in almost all rendering code, and a few new functions in core.

### Signal rename and documentation

Some signal names [have changed](https://github.com/WayfireWM/wayfire/pull/623). This was related to an effort to improve their documentation and to make sure that naming is uniform across various signals.

### Moving to `wf::`
Most of the public API classes and functions are now in the `wf::` namespace instead of using a `wf_` prefix.

### wlroots 0.11
Last but not least, the latest Wayfire release is compatible with wlroots 0.11.

Thank you for reading and stay tuned for more updates!
